#summary options for installing and configuring AtomBeat

= Deployment Options =

AtomBeat can be deployed in one of two ways.

== Option 1 - Drop In to an eXist 1.4 Installation ==

If you already have eXist 1.4 installed somewhere, you can drop the AtomBeat folder into eXist's web directory. You shouldn't have to restart eXist, AtomBeat will be compiled the first time it is invoked (it is just a collection of XQuery modules).

To obtain a release of AtomBeat suitable for this deployment method, look for a [http://code.google.com/p/atombeat/downloads/list Download] named atombeat-existapp-*.zip. This is a zipped folder containing the AtomBeat XQuery files - unzip it and copy to the eXist web directory.

If you deploy AtomBeat in this way, but want to use the AtomBeat security system, you will need to do additional work to integrate AtomBeat with your preferred authentication implementation, see the notes on authentication in the SecurityExtension documentation. See below on turning off the AtomBeat security system.

== Option 2 - Standalone WAR ==

You can also obtain AtomBeat as a standalone WAR, with both eXist 1.4 and Orbeon Forms embedded. This WAR also comes with Spring Security and an example configuration using HTTP basic authentication, so it shouldn't be too much work to start using the security system if you want to.

Look for a [http://code.google.com/p/atombeat/downloads/list Download] named atombeat-webapp-*.war. You should be able to drop this into your favourite servlet container. 

Note that we originally embedded Orbeon Forms into this WAR in addition to eXist because Orbeon was our main UI development platform in a related project, and so this proved convenient for prototyping applications against AtomBeat. There are notes on how we built eXist 1.4 with Orbeon on the OrbeonForms wiki page. This method of embedding Orbeon within the same WAR is problematic, however, if you want to upgrade Orbeon, and so we will probably remove Orbeon from future WAR releases of AtomBeat, and provide a stripped down WAR with just eXist 1.4 embedded. Orbeon could then be configured in the [http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/xforms-with-java-applications separate deployment] mode.

= Configuration =

AtomBeat is configured by editing the two XQuery module files in the [http://code.google.com/p/atombeat/source/browse/trunk/atombeat/war/atombeat/config config] folder - [http://code.google.com/p/atombeat/source/browse/trunk/atombeat/war/atombeat/config/shared.xqm shared.xqm] and [http://code.google.com/p/atombeat/source/browse/trunk/atombeat/war/atombeat/config/plugins.xqm plugins.xqm].

Most of the configuration options should be fairly self-explanatory, please drop a comment on this page if you have any problems or questions.

Note that, if you make any changes to these files whilst AtomBeat is running, you may need to restart eXist before the changes will be picked up.
